In this video, we're
going to look at
two quite specialized
chart types called
the waterfall chart
and the funnel chart.
Let's start with the
waterfall chart.
Waterfall charts are
often used to show
financial data because
they allow us to
visualize how a series
of increases and
decreases got us
to a final figure.
They look very similar to
column charts except
that each increase,
let's say our revenues,
are shown as a step up,
each decrease, for
example our costs,
are shown as a step down,
and only the totals are
shown as a height from zero.
In this example, Brian
actually wants to use
a waterfall chart to
show how the increases
and decreases in population
in the various member states
have led to our overall
population change within the EU.
This data is what we
call categorical.
It doesn't really matter
the sequence as long as
the final population change
is shown in the last row.
Bear in mind, of course, that if
we change the sort order,
the look of the
chart will change.
If you are working
with time series data,
so transactions over time,
then it is important
that your data is
sequenced oldest to newest.
To create the chart, we're
going to click into our data,
we're going to come
to our "Insert" tab,
we're going to come to
the charts group and
we're going to look for
the "Waterfall" icon.
Right at the top you'll
see "Waterfall" and
we're going to click on
that to create our chart.
I'm just going to make
that a bit bigger
so we can see it more clearly.
If you have a look
a little closely,
you'll notice each increase
is shown as a blue step-up,
each decrease in population is
shown as an orange step down,
but there's one small problem,
our final population total
is actually being
shown as an increase.
Creating a waterfall
chart involves two steps.
First, we create the chart.
Second, we have to
identify the totals,
this is not done for
us automatically.
To do this, I'm
going to click once
to highlight the whole series
and then I'm going to click
again on the actual total.
Then I'm going to right-click,
and right near the bottom
you'll see Set as Total.
What you'll need to
do is apply that
for each of the
totals in your chart.
You might not just have
a total at the end,
you might have an
opening balance,
you might have interim totals,
so you can have as many
totals as you need,
you just need to remember
to set them as total.
So we're most of the way there.
Let's make a few final changes.
We have the data labels
and they make it
very clear what's happening.
So we actually don't
need the gridlines.
I'm going to click into my chart,
come to "Chart Elements",
I'm going to turn the "Gridlines"
off and in fact the axes,
I don't need my primary
vertical axis either.
I do, however, need a more
meaningful chart titles,
so I'm just going to click into
the heading and I'm
going to copy all of
that and then I'm going
to come into chart title,
triple click and paste.
Then there's my completed
waterfall chart.
Let's now have a look
at a funnel chart.
I'm going to the next
tab in my workbook,
and I've actually got
the funnel chart we're
going to create so you get
an idea of where we're heading.
Now funnel chart is
another specialized chart,
but it's very well suited to
showing the progressive
reduction of
data as data passes from
one phase to another.
Data in each phase is
shown as a proportion
of the original value
and as it decreases,
we get that distinctive
funnel shape.
Funnel charts are typically
used for representing
a sales pipeline but they
do have other applications.
In this case, no
one is going to use
a funnel chart to represent
what proportion of
plastics produced
in a year end up in
the oceans and the process
they go through to get there.
I'm just going to
remove this chart,
I'm going to delete, and
then I'm going to
click into my data.
Here the sort order
is quite important.
You want to have
the first phase of
the top going through to
the last phase at the
bottom and typically that
should go from the largest
value to the lowest.
Now we're going to
click in our data,
come to our "Insert" tab,
we're going to come
back to our waterfall
chart icon but we're going to
choose "Funnel" this
time, and there it is.
Too easy. There are not
a lot of changes you
can make to the funnel chart
and the colors for example
we only have the one series,
so you're going to be
locked into one color,
but we can make it look a
little more interesting.
I'm going to turn off
the title because I'm just
going to use the title in
the workbook and then I'm
going to format my series.
To do this, I'm just going
to click onto one of
the series and driven
by a keyboard shortcut,
Control 1, and that opens
our panel on the right.
Then I'm going to come
to my Series Options,
my Fill, and I'm going
to change my Fill.
But instead of a color,
I'm actually going
to use a picture.
Now when you click onto
"Picture or texture fill",
if you haven't used this before,
you will probably get something
that looks like that,
which is pretty horrible,
but we're going to replace
that with the picture.
So under "Picture source",
can you please click "Insert"
and "Online images",
unless you have a nice
image on your computer.
We're going to look for pics of
the ocean and we're making
sure that Creative
Commons is ticked,
but it's still worth checking
the licensing so you don't use
somebody's picture
without their permission.
I'm going to find a nice
picture of the ocean,
and then I'm going
to click "Insert".
There's our completed
funnel chart.
If you have a slightly
older version of Excel,
you might not have
these chart types yet,
but don't worry, later this week,
we're going to show you how
you can create a chart very
similar to a funnel chart
using a standard bar chart,
and in the practice challenge,
we actually give you an
example of how you can
create a waterfall chart
using a column chart.
Don't forget to check out this
week's practice challenge.